The Joe Rogan experience.
What is going on today, where this is such a hot topic? Like what has hap,
I mean, what has been the shift in our culture is,
is can you find a patient zero? Was there an,
an initial explosion that led to the domino effect? Like what,
what is it that's leading to such an utter fascination
culture wide about gender and sex.
Now it's like these, these hot, these are the big, hot topics of today.
It's gender sex race. And those, those things seem to, I guess,
also sexual orientation, gender, sex, race, sexual orientation, those three,
I mean, those four,
it is just unprecedented in our time that these are the most
widely talked about subjects across the board with young people and
people that are virtue signaling and people that want to be, you know,
air quotes woke, like what's, what's causing this Colin help us out.
You know, it's something I've been tracking for for quite some time,
like a bounty hunter. Yes, exactly. Well, I, I was always,
so I started off in like the new atheist movement and I was arguing against
creationists and stuff and defending biological realities. And then that kind,
that movement kind of anticipated and,
or at least as not nearly as prevalent and they don't hold what happened with
new.
There's I think is AISM plus.
Yeah. I mean,
there's an actually an interesting segue between atheism plus and the,
the modern social justice movement, as we see it now, I mean,
for sure atheism was the first movement to be infiltrated by all the language
we're hearing now of, you know, appropriation and the whole, um, you know,
check your privilege. And, well, I.
Remember that, all that stuff. Yeah.
I remember to watching atheism plus conferences online going, yeah,
this is like the,
the craziest virtue signaling event that I've ever seen in my life.
Cause it's people that don't just want to talk about the concept of agnostic
thinking or atheism,
they wanna also attribute a bunch of values to this
movement that makes it kind of like a religion.
Have you heard of elevator gate yes. With Richard Dawkins yes.
Involved in that home. Yes. Yeah. That was sort of the,
the thing that sparked off in a big way, the,
the rise of a lot of social justice stuff and the fall, could.
You explain to don't know what it was about?
Yeah, it was a while ago. Let me see if I can outline it a bit here.
So there had been some complaints at a lot of atheist conferences where,
um, there had been, uh,
people complaining of sexual harassment and there was one specific example.
There was a speaker, her name was Rebecca Watson.
She went by skeptic and she was giving a, got this conference,
uh, specifically addressing sexism in the atheist movement. And she,
I think she might have said that she wasn't interested in, in, you know,
hooking up at conferences or whatever.
And then on the way back to her hotel later that night, uh,
she went into the elevator and then someone went into the elevator with her.
It was the guy. And as they were going up in the elevator,
he looked over at her and just asked her if she'd like to come back to his room
for a cup of coffee, I was like, that's literally what he said. Um, but that's,
you know, that's a euphemism for you wanna come back and Netflix and chill,
Netflix and chill. Yeah. And so she said, no,
he didn't pursue anymore. If they went off to their separate rooms,
everything was fine. The next day on social media,
she blows up the internet trying to say that how terrible this was,
how she felt so uncomfortable in the elevator. It was a, was a tight, uh,
tight spot, you know, small elevator. And this how threatened that she was.
And it became a really big sort of Fisher in the atheist movement because some
people were saying like, nothing really happened. He,
they just used a euphemism for, you know, they, they asked you politely,
if you wanted to come back and do more, you said, no,
like that's the end of the story.
And then there was this atheist named PEY Meyers who since sort of lost his
mind. Um,
and on his blog was talking about this event.
And then Richard Dawkins in the comment section wrote,
what's known as the dear mu Lima letter. Yeah.
Which is he was writing a sarcastic response to this. As he,
as though he was addressing some random Muslim woman saying like, you know,
dear mu Lima, you have no right to complain about how you're treat, you know,
having your genital mutilated or whatever, because haven't,
you heard this one woman, her name is skeptic chick. You know, she was offered,
copied an elevator. And she said, no, and the guy didn't do anything after that.
So it was a very sarcastic mm-hmm <affirmative> way. He, he approached that.
And then that just made the whole athe woman just in getting engulfed in flames
immediately.
It was all the factions split up between the super woke people and the classic
skeptics and yeah. That it never recovered really.
And right after that is when atheism plus came out,
which was atheism plus social justice,
which really just was woke Democrats who happened to be atheists
basically.
And all the new conference topics were just like intersection and maybe some
vague reference to, you know, disbelief or something.
So the athe movement never recovered from that. It was it's gone downhill.
And now we've seen how the same type of activism has moved in and taken over,
you know,
evergreen state college and has led to what Brett and Heather have gone through
and then sort of erupt all over,
erupt it all over the country and what we're seeing now. So that was sort of a,
the Canary in the coal mine for a lot of what we're seeing now. And what.
Do you think is causing it? Like what, I mean,
a lot of people have theories on this, but I want to know your personal one.
Like, what is, why is this a thing today?
Yeah. Well, there's so many different aspect to thel.
So in the specific area of, I guess the whole sex denial thing,
I think there's this sort of this allergy to,
to the word discrimination in a way where we've been told that discrimination is
a terrible thing, always, but I mean, it might sound controversial,
but discrimination just means that we're distinguishing between two different
things in a certain context.
Right. We think of discrimination like.
Yeah, we can prejudice. I'm, I'm discriminating in this certain,
this certain thing. I mean, if you, if you have a,
a children's sports league that discriminates against adult,
so most people would say that that's a good,
that's a good type of discrimination, right.
But we've just sort of adopted this idea that discrimination is really bad.
And so now when we talk about, uh, trans women in sports or something, you know,
they think they're being discriminated against.
And what you'll see in the headlines is, you know,
women and girls are not able who are trans are not able to play in sports for,
or women and girls.
What they fail to mention is that it's not the fact that they're trans <laugh>.
That is the reason why they're not being able to compete.
It's the fact that they're, you know, biologically male and that's the,
the thing that's being kept, uh, that we're trying to discriminate against,
not the fact that they're trans because trans is just like a state of mind that
they can have. They declare that they're trans, you know,
you can't verify it empirically in any way. And, um, so there's this,
there's no reason to segregate sports by just a,
a state of your mind basically anymore that you would wanna segregate sports by
political ideology or something else that's completely irrelevant.
So I think an aversion to the, the concept of, uh,
the idea that discrimination is bad just across the board is,
is holding us back from having more productive conversations.
And then I know you've had people like James Lindsay on, and they,
they talk about just the, the critical theory,
the theory that's out there, where it's just meant to just pick apart anything,
anytime there's, they see a binary,
they need you to deconstruct it and deconstruct it. And there's,
it's based on this, uh, epistemology of, of relativistic, um, you know,
relative truth, um, blurring borders between other things, systems of power.
This is sort of the ideology that has,
has taken a root in a lot of different areas in society. And,
and it's really been coming to a head in the last few years on,
on many topics too, on the whole sex and gender debate.
We have the critical race theory stuff. We have the postcolonial, you know,
decolonize the curriculum and, you know, it is just,
it's spreading outta control. And then people who, who are not, who are,
who are not the postmodern type people who are, you know,
have the enlightenment use and,
and we're modernists in the way we approach the world. We think that, you know,
if something's true, if it corresponds to reality,
and there's certain truths that, uh, can't really be denied by anybody,
a lot of us are pushing back.
And because we've seemed to have lost a lot of a foothold in the institutions,
it's now resulting in, you know, people getting cancel.
Yeah. It's a strange time in that regard where it just,
it seems like no one knows exactly what our,
our cultural framework is anymore for discussing things.
And every time the, the, it gets pushed further and further along,
you have to kind of catch up with what you're allowed to say and what you're
allowed to talk about. And wh what's okay. Like it,
didn't used to be controversial to say there are two genders,
there's only two genders, but if you say it today,
you could get fired from your job. I mean, that's a real thing.
You can get discriminated against.
You can not that discriminations pat as we've discussed,
but you know what I mean? It's like, it's, this is a new thing to, to,
to get to a position where talking about biological facts,
you really shouldn't, you have to discuss the societal agreement,
the cultural agreement we have about like how we view or, you know,
this is what, what the, the push is or what, you know, this idea of, uh,
the compliance force compliance into this ideology. You have to,
you have to accept what we view now as sex
and gender. Yeah.
There's like a language takeover. Yeah.
And even when you said just earlier second and go that there's, you know,
there's two genders. Well, they've just, co-opted the, that word,
gender mm-hmm <affirmative>. And so what used to be the case,
and this was something that I was on board with. I was a good, you know,
considered myself.
Progressive was a lot of people would say that sex and gender are
different things, sex referred to your reproductive anatomy,
your biology and gender referred to just the way you identify, you know,
you can identify as a man or a woman, or, you know, if they wanna expand that,
whatever that means, um, it has to do with identity.
It's sort of like sex is your hardware. Uh, gender is your software, right?
Where you can be a male and identify as a woman.
And that was something that I was sort of willing to get on board with.
And I was like, okay, why do we need to have the, you know,
we already have male and female to refer to sex.
Why do we need to also use man and woman? Maybe we can just let you know, the,
those people have have that because as a biologist, it didn't really
my, my,
my defense didn't really go up because as long as we're we know what sex is
then fine, I can, I'll be willing to manage that. And then slowly over time,
that distinction became more and more blurry where now they would say,
instead of that, identify as a man or a woman, they say,
I identify as a male or a female.
And they're using the sex terms where they used to use gender terms.
And then I'd started seeing on my Facebook,
popping up people with P HDS in biology, sharing articles,
like there are five sexes,
or there are seven different sexes or sexes as social construct. And this was,
as I started pushing back against that, I,
I thought there must have been talking about gender identity,
but it became very clear that know they're talking about actual sex itself and
that there's, you know,
every different chromosomal arrangement that someone can have.
Like if you're a client filter male or something, you have X, Y Y uh,
chromosomes that you're a, your own unique sex now, rather than just, you know,
a variation within, within the male, the male sex.
Do you have a theory as to what, what caused all this? Or as to why it's,
it seems to be progressing. It's not,
it's not like they reached a point and they went, okay.
I think we made our point. Let's, uh,
let's sort of normalize this and have it be accepted into the, the common,
you know, thoughts of people, but it's, that's not what's happening.
It's says like it, can he getting weirder and weirder and weirder it's like,
think he pushed the envelope about what it means.
Yeah. There's no one to put on the breaks really. I mean, they've,
they're within the institutions and the people who would normally wanna speak
up, um, like, like I did, they get called names. They, you know,
I was looking for tenure track positions and I had people post on,
on job boards in my field that thousands of biologists look every day that I was
a transp and a race scientist that they just threw in on top of things, just to,
you know, throw a bunch of slurs at me and see what sticks and try to, uh,
poison the well for my, my, my potential hiring.
And so people see that that happens. And then they just,
they just don't wanna do it. They stay quiet. Right. And then,
so all you hear is the, the loudest voices, the most activists, uh,
they come out and they'll, they'll just say this type of stuff.
And then a lot of people don't wanna say anything because they're generally
confused because of the jargon that's being used. Um,
and then they're kind of do a human shield aspect where they're,
they're portraying themselves as sort of the next evolution of L G B T
rights or in the terms of critical race there where the,
this next civil rights movement.
And so no one wants to be on the wrong side of history,
even though they don't understand what people are saying sounds nuts,
but who are they to really judge what this is? They just,
they don't wanna be called a racist because that's the worst thing you can be
called.
They don't wanna be called a trans because we're wanna be accepting people. And,
uh, fortunately I think a lot of people are,
<laugh> sort of beginning to see that,
and they're willing to stand up a little bit more now and at least call it like
it is saying that these people have a really bad concept of what biological sex
actually is. No, there's not seven sexes, no sex. Isn't a, you know,
a bimodal distribution where we're just varying degrees of maleness and
femaleness. You know, we can, we can definitively say for, you know,
4,999 people out of, out of 5,000,
that they are unambiguously male or female. Uh, and you know,
we can account for the 1% that's not, but, um, that,
doesn't all of us sort of in question of what, what our sex is.
Catch new episodes, the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps,
N can download episodes to save on data cost all for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full of the Joe Rogan experience.